WASHINGTON — The White House offered an explanation on Sunday for a mysterious phone call that President Trump placed to Preet Bharara a day before abruptly dismissing him and 45 other United States attorneys, saying the president was merely trying to extend his good wishes.

But Mr. Bharara indicated on Sunday evening in a statement to The New York Times that he was skeptical of the White House account, although he did not offer an alternative explanation for the president’s call.

The call, placed on Thursday to the office of Mr. Bharara, the top federal prosecutor in Manhattan, by a personal assistant to the president, concerned Mr. Bharara because it seemed to be at odds with ethics protocols restricting communications between the White House and prosecutors. Mr. Bharara declined to return the call. But the White House said there was nothing untoward about it.

“The president reached out to Preet Bharara on Thursday to thank him for his service and to wish him good luck,” Sarah Huckabee Sanders, a White House spokeswoman, said in an email.

That account left many questions about the firing of Mr. Bharara, who was told by Mr. Trump during the transition period that he would be retained. Some Democrats accused Mr. Trump on Sunday of seeking to deter aggressive federal investigations on Wall Street and elsewhere.

Despite being asked repeatedly on Saturday about the nature of the call, the White House was silent until Sunday. Ms. Sanders declined to answer other questions, such as why Mr. Trump had changed his mind on Mr. Bharara, whether the president had made similar calls to other United States attorneys before demanding their resignations, and why the president did not try to convey his good wishes through an aide or by some other means.

In the call on Thursday, a woman who said she was from the president’s office left a voice mail message asking Mr. Bharara to call back, according to a person to whom Mr. Bharara described the call. The person, who was not authorized to discuss the matter, spoke on the condition of anonymity. Mr. Bharara conferred with his deputy about whether it would be appropriate to return the call, the person said.

Then he and his deputy, Joon H. Kim, reviewed Justice Department memos governing such contacts, the person added. Because the caller had not specified what the president wanted to discuss, they concluded that it would be prudent to not return the call and to instead contact the office of Attorney General Jeff Sessions, the person said.

Mr. Bharara called the chief of staff to the attorney general, Joseph H. Hunt. “Mr. Hunt was direct and clear in our conversation that, given written White House contacts policy, my position as a sitting U.S. attorney, and my office’s jurisdiction, it would be improper for me to speak directly to the sitting president without knowing the subject matter,” Mr. Bharara said in his statement.

“Some might find that inconsistent with what is for the first time, three days later being described as a well-wishes call,” he added.

After speaking with Mr. Hunt, Mr. Bharara called the White House back and said the attorney general’s office had advised him not to speak directly with the president.

It has not been unusual for new presidents to bring in a new roster of United States attorneys, but the abrupt dismissals on Friday caused concern about instability in the Justice Department.

Two days before the prosecutors were dismissed, Mr. Sessions held a conference call with them on a Justice Department initiative and offered no hint that they would soon be forced out.

Almost all of the 46 United States attorneys asked to resign on Friday have now done so, a Justice Department official said. The balance of the nation’s 94 United States attorneys had already resigned.

Career prosecutors are running most of the United States attorneys’ offices until the White House nominates successors for Senate confirmation.

Mr. Bharara announced on Saturday on Twitter that he had been fired after refusing to turn in his resignation. His public defiance came two days after he received the White House call.

On Twitter on Sunday, Senator Elizabeth Warren, a Massachusetts Democrat who is one of the president’s fiercest critics, charged that the call to Mr. Bharara was a breach of protocol and that Mr. Trump was trying to stifle aggressive prosecutions by dismissing him.

Ms. Warren promised the president a “massive fight” in the Senate if he seeks to replace “real prosecutors with cronies.”
